>> When somebody is the
President the authority is
total.
>> He's not doing everything
he can do.
>> ...bidding against one
another...
>> ...can't tell you how
frustrating it is.
>> NARRATOR: Amid the escalating
crisis between the president and
the states over the coronavirus
pandemic.
>> It has nothing to do with the
president or federal policy or
anything.
>> NARRATOR: The inside story of
how the outbreak began in the
United States.
>> The reason Washington State
found that first case cause we
were ready for it.
>> NARRATOR: Correspondent Miles
O'Brien on the ground with
those who detected it first.
>> Within the first five days we
had 32 positives.
We then knew that this was a
much bigger outbreak than you
could have imagined.
>> NARRATOR: And, the tale of
two Washington's.
>> That governor is a snake.
Okay.
Inslee.
>> We are not going to be
distracted by any rhetoric that
the President or anyone else
uses.
Facts and science.
That's the only thing that's
going to get us through this.
>> NARRATOR: Now on FRONTLINE,
“Coronavirus Pandemic”.
(seagulls squawking, siren
blaring)
>> It was one of the most
vibrant cities in America.
Our economy was strong, a port
that was one of the leading
ports in the country.
We had one of the most vibrant
restaurant scenes, small
businesses flourishing.
And we went from that to almost
zero overnight.
(ship horn blares)
>> MILES O'BRIEN: I arrived in
Seattle in mid March, a city and
state in the process of shutting
down before that was the norm in
the rest of the country.
I've covered science stories for
nearly 30 years, but this felt
more like science fiction.
The deadly disease COVID-19
was about to bring the country
and the world to its knees.
>> It's like watching a
slow-moving landslide move
towards you.
>> O'BRIEN: How did it evade our
warning systems, our best
science?
>> A lot of people died because
we weren't ready.
>> O'BRIEN: Why was our
government so slow to act, so
unprepared?
>> I haven't cried ever as much
as I have in the last week.
>> O'BRIEN: And what lies ahead?
♪ ♪
I came to Seattle looking for
answers.
My first stop...
How are you?
...Providence Regional Medical
Center in nearby Everett.
>> And have you traveled outside
the U.S. in the last 30 days?
>> I have.
>> Okay, so we're gonna ask you
to put on a mask.
>> O'BRIEN: Okay.
This is the hospital that
treated the first known case of
COVID-19 in the country.
>> There we go, 97.6.
>> O'BRIEN: I met Dr. George
Diaz, an expert in infectious
diseases who treated patient
one-- a 35-year-old local
man who'd flown into Seattle
on January 15.
>> He was having a cough, he had
been having fevers at home, he
hadn't been eating well, he
generally felt poorly and he had
been complaining of diarrhea at
home.
>> O'BRIEN: He is 35 years old
and otherwise healthy.
>> Totally healthy person.
He began developing symptoms the
day after he arrived.
>> O'BRIEN: He went to this
walk-in clinic and described his
symptoms and told them where he
had been for about six weeks:
Wuhan, China.
>> A preliminary investigation
into a mysterious pneumonia
outbreak in Wuhan, China, has
identified...
>> O'BRIEN: That was a crucial
detail.
>> The mysterious new pneumonia
virus has sickened dozens of
people...
>> O'BRIEN: For weeks, Wuhan had
been the center of a growing
storm.
>> Scientists in China trying...
>> O'BRIEN: ...as news trickled
out about cases of a strange new
pneumonia.
>> Still a lot that is unknown,
the W.H.O. has said...
>> O'BRIEN: In Seattle, a city
known for cutting-edge medicine
and technology as well as ties
to Asia, officials told me they
had been on alert.
>> It clearly had the attention
of our public health folks, and
they in turn were starting to
line up the other departments,
starting with Human Services,
about how we're going to respond
when and if it arrived on our
shores.
>> O'BRIEN: At the clinic where
the man returning from Wuhan was
seeking treatment, they took no
chances.
>> At that point the clinic
appropriately isolated him.
The health district contacted
the CDC, who advised testing.
And fortunately that clinic had
the appropriate gear to be able
to safely test the patient.
He was then advised to go home
and quarantine.
>> O'BRIEN: The clinic sent a
nasal swab they'd taken from the
man to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention in
Atlanta.
>> And then, within 24 hours, we
had a call from the CDC saying
that the test was positive and
that they wanted us to admit him
for observation.
>> O'BRIEN: The first COVID-19
patient had been confirmed in
the United States.
Around 10:00 p.m. on January
20, patient one was brought to
the Providence Regional Medical
Center.
This is a photograph of his
arrival, encased in what's
called an isopod, designed to
keep a patient quarantined.
>> Patient number one
arrived here in this?
>> He did.
When we were going through
the transportation plan with the
ambulance company, they wanted
to keep their staff safe.
Completely contained,
doesn't allow any possibility of
infection.
So our patient was placed in
this by EMS and brought to our
hospital and unloaded in his
room.
So, it took us about two hours
from the time the CDC called
for us to get all our staff
personnel, supplies, and the
facilities all in place to be
able to give the EMS folks the
greenlight to come in.
>> O'BRIEN: You did that in two
hours?
>> In two hours.
We were ready for it.
>> O'BRIEN: One of the reasons
they were so ready: less
than three weeks earlier, Diaz
and his colleagues had conducted
an elaborate simulation--
pandemic training.
>> We were aware of what was
going on in Wuhan at that point,
but it was part of our routine
structure already to prepare.
>> O'BRIEN: You really had a
go-to plan.
>> We had a game plan in place
already.
We had everyone involved,
including the local EMS,
those people that bring the
patients from point A to point
B, public health officials, and
other partners we have in the
community to drill.
So we had a variety of scenarios
we went through.
>> O'BRIEN: By the time patient
one was hospitalized, local
public health officials were
going into high gear.
>> The reason Washington state
found that first case 'cause we
were ready for it.
The ambulance service was ready,
they knew the right personal
protective equipment to wear, it
was one of those absolute
coordination between the health
care, local health, state
health, and the CDC.
It went perfectly.
That's how we were able to find
the first case in the country.
>> O'BRIEN: It was a critical
early warning sign that the
highly contagious coronavirus
could be spreading in the U.S.
But in his first public
comments, President Trump
dismissed any threat to the rest
of the country.
>> Have you been briefed by the
CDC?
>> I have.
>> Are there worries about a
pandemic at this point?
>> No, not at all.
And we're... we have it totally
under control.
It's one person coming in from
China, and we have it under
control.
It's going to be just fine.
>> All right.
Safe travels...
>> Thank you.
>> ...on your way back.
>> O'BRIEN: In Seattle, doctors
and scientists weren't so sure--
they didn't have a way to test
for coronavirus on their own.
And while the CDC had been able
to test the sample from patient
one, it didn't yet have a test
it could deploy on a massive
scale around the country.
>> The way to really know the
burden of disease in your
community is to be able to test.
So the testing piece was a huge
piece of the puzzle that we
didn't really fully... we
weren't fully able to address.
>> O'BRIEN: By early February,
with the virus spreading around
the globe, the World Health
Organization was recommending
test kits that had been
developed in Germany.
But U.S. officials made a
fateful decision to go their
own way.
>> If you look at a moment when
the United States may have lost
its ability to control what's
happening, it begins with the
decision early on in 2020 by
the CDC not to utilize the test
kits and the capabilities that
were being shared by the World
Health Organization and other
nations.
>> O'BRIEN: The CDC wouldn't
talk to me on camera, but told
me they took the swiftest
path and using another nation's
test would have caused worse
delays.
Former CDC director Tom Frieden
said the decision made sense.
>> There's never been a time
previously when there was a need
to use a test from outside
because the CDC system has not
failed in the past.
>> O'BRIEN: The CDC began
shipping its own test kits to
public health labs around the
country.
But in Seattle and elsewhere, it
was quickly obvious that
something was wrong.
One of the three chemical probes
was faulty, generating
inconclusive results.
>> There were checks and
balances within the test.
And when we validated can it
detect the virus and can it not
overdetect it, that balance was
not correct.
>> Research and implementation
laboratories said, you know,
"This doesn't work.
You've given us a bogus kit,
and we're not going to use it.
Fix it, fast.
You know, or give us the right
to use our own kits."
>> O'BRIEN: At the University of
Washington I met virologist
Alex Greninger, who'd been
trying to do just that.
>> You got to have the supply of
testing, absolutely do.
We need to be able to detect
where the virus is and then try
and snuff it out, I mean, right?
Prevent its transmission, that's
the name of the game in the
coming months.
>> O'BRIEN: But he ran into a
bureaucratic brick wall: the
Food and Drug Administration had
instituted emergency procedures
to make sure any new tests were
accurate.
>> You can make your own tests,
but you have to send it to the
FDA and get it reviewed and then
authorized.
And I'll admit, I'm in my first
couple of years here in this
particular job, I had not been
through this process before.
>> O'BRIEN: The FDA application
was 28 pages long, and required
him to run tests that would take
at least two weeks.
And that wasn't all.
>> One of the things is they
needed a document FedEx-ed
across the country before they
could look at the document.
>> O'BRIEN: You couldn't
electronically transmit it?
>> I could electronically
transmit it, but they couldn't
look at it until it was
FedEx-ed.
And then they changed that
regulation.
And so from a couple days after
February 4 all the way to
February 26, they didn't have a
test, they were completely
blind, too.
>> O'BRIEN: This had to be
incredibly frustrating.
>> It was frustrating, it was.
So we try to prioritize things
in the top tier.
>> O'BRIEN: The FDA told me it
did review Greninger's
application but it was
incomplete.
They also said they were
balancing the need for tests
with concerns about accuracy.
>> Major developments, a global
health emergency as the
coronavirus reaches its 20th
country.
>> O'BRIEN: In Seattle and
and around the world, the clock
was ticking.
>> The coronavirus is now
considered a global health
emergency and the US is warning
people not to travel to China.
>> O'BRIEN: The W.H.O. had
declared a global emergency, and
the CDC was beginning to screen
passengers at U.S. airports,
including Seattle.
>> We are coordinating with the
Chinese government and working
closely together on the
coronavirus outbreak in China.
>> O'BRIEN: President Trump was
still not raising alarms, though
he banned foreign travelers from
China.
>> My administration will take
all necessary steps to safeguard
our citizens from this threat.
>> O'BRIEN: But, by that time,
flights from the outbreak zone
had been landing at U.S.
airports for weeks.
>> The travel ban may have
bought us some time, but in all
actuality, you know, people
were leaving Wuhan, going to
Beijing, traveling to Western
Europe and ultimately to the
United States in late 2019 and
early 2020 anyway.
>> Chinese health officials
said today another 46 people
have died from the coronavirus.
>> O'BRIEN: In those critical
first weeks after the arrival of
the virus in the U.S.,
administration officials-- and
the president himself--
continued to insist that the
risk was small.
>> I want to emphasize that this
is a serious health situation in
China, but I want to emphasize
that the risk to the American
public currently is low.
>> How concerned are you?
>> Well, we pretty much shut it
down coming in from China.
We've offered China help, but we
can't have thousands of people
coming in who may have this
problem, the coronavirus.
So we're gonna see what happens,
but we did shut it down, yes.
>> O'BRIEN: That attitude didn't
sit well with Washington's
senior Democratic senator Patty
Murray.
She spoke to me from her home.
>> I felt like at the time I
lived in two different worlds.
I lived here in Washington
state, where people were going,
"Oh, my gosh, we have a
problem," and in Washington
D.C., where they'd say, "Oh, you
guys worry too much out in the
West Coast."
>> O'BRIEN: A tale of two of
Washingtons.
>> Yeah.
We should have pulled out all
the stops and checked
everything, but it was more
like, "Oh, you guys quit
worrying out there."
>> O'BRIEN: There was a lot
to worry about.
In isolation at Providence
Hospital, patient one was
deteriorating.
>> He began developing more
shortness of breath.
And because of that we got an
x-ray which looked like he had a
developing pneumonia.
His oxygen levels in his blood
were also decreasing.
>> O'BRIEN: That worried Dr.
Diaz, who'd been following the
dire medical reports out of
Wuhan.
>> It appeared, based on their
data, that once patients begin
developing pneumonia that many
of them end up in the ICU on a
ventilator and die.
>> O'BRIEN: Patient one was
slipping fast, and there was no
known treatment.
Dr. Diaz told me he'd heard
about an antiviral drug called
Remdesivir that some experts
thought could potentially help.
It would be an experiment, he
said, but the patient was
willing.
>> At that point, I contacted
the FDA and Gilead, the
manufacturer, to see if they
would approve it.
So the FDA gave us an approval
to try it on a compassionate use
basis, knowing that it had not
been approved yet and that there
were no trials available to base
that decision on.
We infused it the next day.
He was still having very high
fevers and still was requiring
oxygen the day that we gave it
to him.
By the next day, his fevers
resolved and they stayed gone.
He felt much better.
He felt like he had started
beating the virus.
>> O'BRIEN: No one knew if the
drug had an impact, or if the
virus was taking its natural
course.
Here's the thing, you have one
data point here.
>> One person in the world.
>> O'BRIEN: Yeah, in the world.
>> It was an anecdote, and so we
were happy that the patient got
better and was ultimately
continuing to get better, able
to go home.
So that part was fantastic for
the patient.
We knew then that we needed to
study this in a formal clinical
trial.
>> O'BRIEN: Although patient one
was well enough to be sent home,
for public health officials in
Washington state, there were
many more questions to answer.
They needed to find out who
patient one might have come in
contact with after returning
from China and send samples from
them to the CDC as well.
>> So, we find contacts, someone
that you spend at least ten
minutes of time talking face to
face with.
We identified 60-plus contacts.
We swab them multiple times to
see was there a transmission of
this virus.
And we found absolutely no
transfer amongst those contacts
that this first case had.
>> O'BRIEN: Washington's
governor, Jay Inslee, remembers
this as a brief, optimistic
moment.
I interviewed him remotely from
his office at the state capitol.
>> What we were thinking is we
were very much on top of it
because we did very extensive
contact tracing with all of the
contacts that the person had who
was the first patient and did
everything epidemiologically
that you could ask a public
health system to do.
>> O'BRIEN: But soon more signs
of trouble began to appear
across Lake Washington in the
city of Kirkland at the Life
Care skilled nursing and rehab
center.
Scott Sedlacek had brought his
86-year-old father there to
recover from a bad fall.
>> So, he hit his head hard
enough that he had some brain
trauma and bleeding on the brain
and he broke his right ankle.
And the bed that opened up was
at Life Care.
And so, on February 20, we
moved my dad to Life Care.
And then we started seeing some
of the staff wearing respiratory
gear, wearing face masks,
wearing gloves.
It's kind of like, "What's going
on?"
>> O'BRIEN: Inside Life Care,
residents had been getting sick
with an unknown respiratory
infection.
The sickest were brought to the
nearby EvergreenHealth Medical
Center.
Dr. Francis Riedo is the medical
director of infection control
here.
>> Remember, this was flu
season.
And we'd already had a peak of
influenza B in December, and now
we were going through the peak
of influenza A.
And so the unit was full of
individuals with severe
respiratory infections.
In the meantime, in the
background, we're watching these
events unfold with increasing
alarm, not only in Wuhan, and
now spreading across the globe
and wondering when our turn was
coming.
>> O'BRIEN: Until that point,
federal guidelines for testing
potential cases were very
narrow-- patients had to have
been in a hotspot like China or
in contact with someone
infected.
Then, the rules changed.
Dr. Riedo wasted no time.
>> We settled on two individuals
and we tested them the following
morning.
I had a regular day, saw
patients in clinic, saw patients
in the hospital, was sitting
there as I usually do trying to
complete my notes and received
a call at 7:40 p.m.
And both of the tests were
positive.
>> O'BRIEN: What goes through
your mind?
>> My initial honest response
was skepticism.
I thought the odds of both
tests in two randomly selected
individuals being positive with
no history of travel, no history
of exposure to anybody was
fairly astronomical.
This was a huge shift.
Incident command was activated
and we made a quick decision to
test nine additional people that
night.
Eight of those nine were
positive.
>> O'BRIEN: Wow.
>> Right.
>> O'BRIEN: Kind of stunning
actually, isn't it?
>> It was, and within the first
five days, we had 32 positives.
>> O'BRIEN: Many were from Life
Care, but crucially, some had no
connection to the nursing home.
>> We then knew that this was a
much bigger outbreak than you
could have imagined.
>> O'BRIEN: At least 41
Life Care residents and
two visitors would
eventually die with more
than a hundred others
linked to the home testing
positive, including Scott
Sedlacek's father, Chuck.
>> He has never shown symptoms.
>> O'BRIEN: So, how worried are
you that symptoms might appear?
>> Extraordinarily.
Because we don't know, this is
new, it's uncharted waters.
>> O'BRIEN: The Sedlaceks' story
hit home for me: my 84-year-old
father is in assisted living in
Florida.
Hello there.
Can you tilt down a little bit?
>> I'm sorry what?
>> O'BRIEN: Tilt down, tilt
down, a little more down.
There you go, that's good.
How you feeling?
>> Well, I'm fine, how are you?
>> O'BRIEN: No coronavirus so
far, but he's pretty much in
isolation, no visitors allowed.
It's the same at Life Care, but
the Sedlaceks have found a way
around that.
>> My sister is here and we'll
go up and will say hi through
the window.
We brought a big white board
today so we can actually write
notes for him because they're
double pane windows to seal the
noise out.
(laughs)
Can you hear us?
>> Okay, we'll let you finish
(laughs)
that-- love you.
>> Okay, we'll let you finish
>> Keep getting better, keep
that-- love you.
listening to the nursing staff.
>> Keep getting better, keep
They're looking out for you.
listening to the nursing staff.
He has to get the love from the
They're looking out for you.
family to get better.
He has to get the love from the
Without it, he will become not
family to get better.
just physically but mentally
Without it, he will become not
ill.
just physically but mentally
>> O'BRIEN: Yeah.
ill.
>> It's the worst thing you can
>> O'BRIEN: Yeah.
do to an older person.
>> It's the worst thing you can
>> O'BRIEN: Yeah, right.
do to an older person.
>> Yeah, the worst thing you can
>> O'BRIEN: Yeah, right.
do.
>> Yeah, the worst thing you can
>> O'BRIEN: Scott himself also
do.
got the virus.
>> O'BRIEN: Scott himself also
Unlike his dad, he got sick.
got the virus.
>> I was hospitalized through
Unlike his dad, he got sick.
the emergency room with the
>> I was hospitalized through
full-blown list of symptoms--
the emergency room with the
extraordinary difficulty
full-blown list of symptoms--
breathing, light-headed,
extraordinary difficulty
dizziness-- you name the
breathing, light-headed,
symptom, I had it.
dizziness-- you name the
>> O'BRIEN: What was it like
symptom, I had it.
being in isolation, sick with
>> O'BRIEN: What was it like
this disease?
being in isolation, sick with
Were you scared?
this disease?
>> Hell yes, I was scared, it's
Were you scared?
an unknown.
>> Hell yes, I was scared, it's
I was hooked up to an IV and
an unknown.
they started an albuterol
I was hooked up to an IV and
nebulizer, which they had to
they started an albuterol
give two full rounds of it.
nebulizer, which they had to
But after those two full rounds,
give two full rounds of it.
I was breathing normally and
But after those two full rounds,
after six hours, they had all my
I was breathing normally and
symptoms under control.
after six hours, they had all my
Within 12 hours, they moved me
symptoms under control.
to a full isolation unit, and
Within 12 hours, they moved me
ten hours later, they released
to a full isolation unit, and
me with zero symptoms.
>> The number of coronavirus
cases at home and abroad
continue to climb, the financial
markets rocked, and more
aggressive steps to fight the
spread...
>> O'BRIEN: By this time in
early March, COVID-19 cases were
multiplying here and around the
country.
>> Breaking news-- Washington is
in a state of emergency...
>> O'BRIEN: Governor Inslee had
put Washington under a state of
emergency...
>> Washington state has declared
a state of emergency...
>> O'BRIEN: ...the first
governor to do so.
>> The governor declaring a
state of emergency...
>> O'BRIEN: But like many here,
he was increasingly concerned
that President Trump was
continuing to downplay the
threat.
>> It's going to all work out.
Everybody has to be calm.
It's all going to work out.
>> O'BRIEN: Inslee, a Democrat
and former presidential
candidate, tweeted that the
administration should stick to
science and tell the truth.
It would ignite an escalating
war of words.
>> O'BRIEN: During a visit to
the CDC, Trump fired back.
>> That governor is a snake.
Okay.
Inslee.
Let me just tell you, we have a
lot of problems with the
governor and... the governor of
Washington, that's where you
have many of your problems.
I said, no matter how nice you
are, he's no good.
That's the way I feel.
>> O'BRIEN: At that point, did
you get the sense that you as
governor and the state of
Washington was sort of on their
own and the federal cavalry was
not coming?
>> Yes, but we didn't ever
depend on that leadership coming
out of the White House, so it's
not something that we were
surprised by.
We always knew that we would
have to lead the charge, given
the president's reluctance to
really exercise leadership on
this.
And we sort of knew that he had
an intent of downplaying what
was an emerging problem.
That, you know, could only be
explained by someone who had
their eye on the Dow Jones
rather than an eye on the
epidemiological curve.
>> O'BRIEN: Seattle's mayor,
Jenny Durkan, shared those
sentiments.
>> We are not going to be
distracted by any rhetoric that
the president or anyone else
uses.
We've got to act.
We've got to act to protect the
people and I think those actions
are what matters.
Facts and science.
Got to rely on them.
That's the only thing that's
going to get us through this,
and, fortunately, we've got a
really vibrant health and
science community here in the
state of Washington and Seattle
and we listen to them.
>> O'BRIEN: She and other
political leaders here had some
hard decisions to make after
hearing grim predictions.
>> We had researchers here
telling us that within six
weeks, we would have over 70,000
positive cases and hundreds of
deaths if we didn't act.
And so we had a choice to make.
The choice was know that you're
going to have enormous pain in
shutting down parts of your
economy, or have those same
impacts later and overrun your
health system.
As we move forward, it will be
increasingly necessary and
important that we are unified in
our efforts.
>> O'BRIEN: Seattle was starting
on a trajectory that the rest of
the country would soon follow.
>> There is no magic silver
bullet at the moment medically,
but there is a very successful
effort that we can take to slow
the spread of this disease and
that's to reduce the social
interactions that are not
necessary in our lives.
>> O'BRIEN: You, the county
executive, and the governor,
were early out of the box on
taking these actions, pretty
proactive.
Did you feel at the time a
little nervous about all that?
>> I think it was... all of us
felt a great deal of... sense of
obligation and concern because
we were the first to go.
>> O'BRIEN: Mayor Durkan
actually had a pandemic response
plan on the shelf, which she and
her cabinet had updated in early
February.
>> We pulled out the pandemic
planning and knew that one of
the first things we had to do to
separate people from another
was have them telecommute, those
that could.
So our largest employers acted
immediately.
>> O'BRIEN: That included
Seattle icon Microsoft, with a
workforce of more than 50,000
one of the largest private
sector employers in the region.
>> So, we had a call on Sunday
afternoon, March 1.
We had the business leaders...
>> O'BRIEN: Microsoft president
Brad Smith spoke to me from
his home.
>> We went from Monday telling
people they should work from
home if they were more
comfortable, Tuesday telling
people, you know, feel free to
work from home, it might be
better, to Wednesday work
from home unless it's essential
you come to work.
>> O'BRIEN: The decision you
made was a big one.
Did you hesitate?
>> No, it was interesting.
Once we decided at Microsoft
that we would be decisive and
base our decisions on public
health advice, then we knew what
to do.
>> It's the hardest decision
I've ever had to make because
all of our instincts are to grow
the whole economy for your city,
to make a stronger
community for everyone.
And what we're saying is we've
got to stop that kind of
community and we have to stop
doing work.
>> O'BRIEN: Almost overnight,
the vibrant city shut down--
businesses closed, storefronts
boarded up, empty restaurants,
the famous Pike Place Market
nearly deserted.
♪ ♪
At a local soccer field usually
filled with kids and families,
preparations for a surge of
COVID patients.
>> We knew already that one of
the biggest challenges would be
having the hospital system
overwhelmed by a wave of cases.
We were trying to figure out how
we could get testing, we were
trying to figure out whether we
would receive material help in
the form of field hospitals or
large facilities encampments for
people who were unhoused.
And there wasn't a lot of
concrete offers of help coming
from the federal government.
So we were left with the reality
that we're going to have to take
on a lot of this ourselves.
>> More than 140 people lost
their lives yesterday, bringing
the death toll to over 590 in
this country.
>> He's not doing everything he
can do.
>> O'BRIEN: As coronavirus was
sweeping the country throughout
March...
>> And I can't tell you how
frustrating it is...
>> O'BRIEN: ...so was the
frustration among governors
scrambling for resources they
needed to respond.
>> We're bidding against one
another, it's really not a great
system.
>> All of the states are taking
action to try to find these
things on our own.
>> O'BRIEN: The president was
now feuding with multiple
governors...
>> 400 ventilators?
I need 30,000 ventilators.
>> O'BRIEN: And like he'd done
with the virus in the
beginning...
>> I don't believe you need
40,000 or 30,000 ventilators.
>> O'BRIEN: ...he disputed
there was scarcity of
crucial medical equipment, like
masks and ventilators.
>> Many of the states are
stocked up.
Some of them don't admit it, but
they have, we have sent so many
things to them, including
ventilators.
>> O'BRIEN: Amid the feuding,
doctors and nurses have
struggled to get the personal
protective equipment, PPE,
they need.
>> Good morning, and welcome,
everyone.
>> O'BRIEN: In Seattle, that's
been the top issue for Dr. Amy
Compton-Phillips, the chief
clinical officer of the
Providence Hospital Network.
>> Last year, across all of
Providence, we used 250,000
masks.
In the first three months of
this at Everett, they've used
250,000 masks.
We cannot have our own
caregivers going down from COVID
while they're trying to take
care of the community, because,
you know, the supply chain is
just not keeping up with our
needs.
>> Amy, I have to say if I can't
assure them that they are safe
then I don't think the rest of
this is worth anything.
>> O'BRIEN: Inside Providence's
emergency department, tensions
around PPE have been high.
Dr. Ryan Keay is the
department's medical director.
>> It's exhausting to constantly
think about the sequence that
you put things on and take
things off and where you're
sanitizing during that sequence.
Every nurse, every tech, every
physician I've talked to has
said, "I've been working for
years and I've never been so
exhausted."
And it leaves people just on
edge all the time.
>> We have enough N-95 masks
that people should not have to
be able... should not have to
bring in their own masks at this
point in time.
>> Is the recommendations still
one N-95 per five patients?
Or are we using it the whole
shift now?
>> We're using them with a face
shield for as long as you need
to use them.
You just store them in a paper
bag until they become moist
or soiled.
>> Okay, so forever?
>> Well, not forever.
(chuckles)
>> O'BRIEN: Reusing masks and
storing them in paper bags
wasn't the only DIY workaround I
saw.
I caught up with Dr.
Compton-Phillips at the
otherwise vacant Providence
headquarters.
Inside a large meeting room, she
and a handful of her team were
spread out a safe distance,
cranking out face shields.
>> Our caregivers would
normally have protective goggles
on and a surgical mask
underneath this and then this
goes in front and basically
protects against droplets.
>> O'BRIEN: They had raided a
half dozen craft stores to
scrounge up supplies.
>> We're at 288 now, we're going
to get to 1,000 by tomorrow.
>> We're retooling our resources
going into war against COVID.
>> I feel like Rosie the
riveter.
>> 499, 500!
(cheering)
>> O'BRIEN: On the one hand,
this is really... it's kind of
heartwarming.
But it's also really sad.
>> Desperation.
>> O'BRIEN: Yeah, I can't decide
which way to go in this.
What are your thoughts?
>> I would rather offer our
caregivers something than
nothing and at the moment, you
know, if the choice is not
having PPE or having homemade
PPE, were going to offer them
homemade PPE.
>> O'BRIEN: Right, right.
>> So...
>> O'BRIEN: That's what
motivated Jeff Kaas-- his small
family business builds and sews
furniture for aviation and
retail customers.
He decided to pitch in and start
making masks.
There's not a shortage of the
raw materials at least, that
would be... or not yet?
>> There will be.
There will be, yeah.
So, I think we've enough to make
two million masks.
>> O'BRIEN: But how long will
that take you to do?
>> Well, it depends on how fast
we want to go.
>> O'BRIEN: How fast do you want
to go?
>> We want to solve the
problem.
My assumption is that we will be
ramping up for several weeks and
then drop off a cliff.
Nobody will need me in the
healthcare business anymore and
then survival becomes a question
for my company.
That's probably the next scary
thing, which is less scary than
what our healthcare friends are
going through right now.
That's the bigger issue for me.
>> We knew in January what we
would need-- we knew.
We would need gloves and masks
and respirators, and
ventilators.
Two-and-a-half months later,
we're dependent on sewing
circles to supply our frontline
heroes with what they need.
It may be a nice American story;
I find it pathetic.
>> O'BRIEN: Washington state
officials, like others in the
country, say this was an
avoidable crisis.
>> Because we've lacked the
federal leadership we needed,
it's been mayor versus mayor,
city versus city, state versus
state, trying to get access
to the limited resources to
protect our communities,
whether it's ventilators or
masks for our health care
workers, all of that
has become this Hunger Games
process where everyone's trying
to figure out a way to outbid
each other.
Washington state had a line on
masks that were coming to the
country and at the port in
California.
Suddenly, multiple states were
bidding on them.
That shouldn't be the way that
it happens.
>> We're searching the world for
every potential warehouse that
have any of this personal
protective equipment.
That has been a constant
struggle and we are bidding
against each other, and I'm
sure that the suppliers are
having a field day bidding the
price up while states are
bidding against one another.
It would be much more efficient
economically and otherwise if
the federal government was
playing a more vigorous role in
that regard.
>> O'BRIEN: The tensions
between states and the
federal government have been
escalating.
>> Another five million
Americans file for unemployment
benefits last week.
>> O'BRIEN: Not just over
the response to the outbreak...
>> The market down ten percent
in relatively short order.
There's a lot of bad news still
to come.
>> O'BRIEN: But now over what
it will take to get the country
up and running again.
>> This is a massive meltdown on
a national scale.
>> More jobs lost in a matter of
two weeks than in the entire 18
months of the Great Recession.
>> Our team of experts now
agrees that we can begin the
next front in our war, which we
are calling "opening up America
again."
>> O'BRIEN: The president has
been pushing governors to
re-open, even as soon as May 1.
>> Or country has to get open.
And it will get open.
And it'll get open safely.
And hopefully quickly.
>> O'BRIEN: But some of them
have been pushing back.
>> We cannot be guided by
emotion.
We need to be guided by where
the facts on the ground, science
and public health take us.
>> What's best for the people of
Illinois, their safety and
health, and listening to the
scientists and the doctors.
>> Because if you do it wrong,
it can backfire.
>> O'BRIEN: And many like Inslee
say it will come down to one
thing: mass testing.
>> This is the number one
challenge for the United States
right now, is we need a huge
ramp up of our testing capacity,
even greater than was needed
early in the outbreak.
>> O'BRIEN: To increase
testing, Inslee says Trump needs
to order U.S. industry to help
using the Defense Production Act
which the President has only
just begun to do.
>> We need the president to help
ignite a national mobilization
of the manufacturing base of the
United States, that is
absolutely imperative so that we
can restart our economy.
>> O'BRIEN: But President Trump
has also thrown this back on the
states.
>> The governors are
responsible, they have to take
charge.
They have to do a great job.
>> O'BRIEN: There are
limits to what a state can do
though, as I saw at Washington's
health department laboratory.
They can only complete about
300 tests a day, and that
requires a mad scramble.
The raw materials for test kits
are hard to come by.
>> We have a lot of testing lab
capability but we don't have the
equipment to swab everybody's
nose.
I think the current status in
Washington state is limited by
the supplies to actually run the
test.
>> O'BRIEN: They also don't have
enough PPE for the health care
workers administering the tests.
>> If we don't have enough
gowns, gloves, masks, to treat
patients, how are we going to
prioritize a gown, a glove, and
a mask to swab somebody?
Because that is the requirement.
>> O'BRIEN: The state health
department isn't alone in
struggling to meet the demand.
>> We can't have that level
of cross-contamination...
>> O'BRIEN: After getting
approval for his test from the
FDA, Alex Greninger has
dramatically ramped up
testing at the University of
Washington School of Medicine
Virology Lab.
>> For inpatients, health care
workers, institutionalized
populations, but mostly
inpatients, people who need
supportive care, we've got to
get that fast turnaround time
that reduces the use of
protective...
>> O'BRIEN: Because they're in
the hospital.
>> Yes.
>> O'BRIEN: On this day, they
completed about 3,000 tests.
>> To get 3,000, 4,000, 5,000
specimens a day, you know, it
takes a lot of focus.
>> O'BRIEN: Just like in the
state lab, Greninger says it is
difficult to get the raw
materials he needs.
One of the hardest things to
find: the single use
plastic tips that contain the
chemicals and the specimens.
>> Some automated pipettors use
four tips a test, and others use
three and, so, just getting the
tips into your facility so we
can run that many tests...
This is what we're looking for,
basically.
We tweeted at Roche and the
world to get these things in,
like you would tweet like
Delta lost your bags or
something like that, right?
I mean, we have two people whose
entire job right now is to
manage our FedEx shipments.
Basically, we blow up our
hallway and it goes down to a
single file.
And then it takes over the next
six to eight hours, we're able
to actually move those boxes
into our local warehouses we
bought other space here in the
building.
It's the supply chain has been
really the number one thing we
do.
>> O'BRIEN: Despite the
problems, they are still
managing to return results
the same day in many cases.
This is crucial to keep up with
a fast-moving virus and help
healthcare workers on the
frontlines reduce their need
for personal protective
equipment.
>> When you send a test for
COVID-19, you have to treat the
person as if they are infected
until we give you a result that
says they aren't.
And during that time, you have
to use all the personal
protective equipment.
So, the speed at which we get
those test results back allows
us to conserve our personal
protective equipment.
It really touches so many
things.
>> O'BRIEN: So what do you
envision the coming months?
>> I think personally right now,
this will be with us for some
time, a long time.
There's no magic bullet just
yet.
>> O'BRIEN: This testing
marathon could go on for at
least a year-- that's how long
experts say it could take to
develop vaccines.
In the meantime, researchers are
racing to finish clinical trials
of several therapeutic drugs
including that promising
antiviral Remdesivir
The one that seemed to work
so well on patient one.
>> On trial?
>> Yes, he's on trial.
He started on the 15th.
>> O'BRIEN: Dr. Diaz is now
leading one of the trials with
patients at Providence Hospital.
>> These are still anecdotes
because we haven't seen the full
study being completed, but we're
certainly very optimistic.
We want to get these questions
answered as fast as possible.
>> O'BRIEN: And there may be
another way to help people fight
off the coronavirus-- using the
blood of COVID survivors
themselves.
Hey Elizabeth, looks like you're
on the mend.
>> Yeah, I've been recovered now
for...
>> O'BRIEN: People like
Elizabeth Schneider.
She was getting ready to become
the first person in Seattle to
donate her plasma to researchers
trying to see what natural
resistance she might have
developed and whether she can
share it.
>> Scientists don't know how
long we have that immunity for
this particular virus.
But signs so far look like, you
know, we will have immunity.
>> O'BRIEN: Survivors' blood as
therapy-- it's not a new idea.
Doctors used it in 1918 in the
midst of the Spanish Flu
pandemic.
>> I do feel a little more sense
of security going out and doing
my day-to-day task because I
have already had this.
>> O'BRIEN: She was among the
first documented COVID-19 cases
in the U.S.
A microbiologist who works for a
biotech company, she came down
with flu symptoms on February
25, three days after attending a
party.
On Facebook she learned many of
her friends who were there were
also sick, 15 in all.
She told me she and
seven others ultimately tested
positive for COVID-19, which
brought her to this moment on
this morning to the blood bank
in downtown Seattle.
>> Hi, I am here for plasma
donation.
>> O'BRIEN: The coronavirus
antibodies in her plasma may be
a way for others to fend off the
virus.
It's called convalescent plasma
therapy.
>> Our goal is to get to 840 mL
today.
>> I'm hoping that some of my
plasma ends up in another
patient who is suffering from
COVID-19 and this could
potentially save their life.
♪ ♪
>> O'BRIEN: There are now signs
that COVID cases may be
plateauing in some places, like
here.
>> We have had some success
flattening the curve, that has
taken place...
>> O'BRIEN: ...but also
spreading to new areas of the
country.
Washington state recently
returned more than 400
ventilators it received from the
national stockpile so they could
be used where they're needed
more.
>> Governor Inslee today
announced that 400 ventilators
would be leaving the state of
Washington.
>> O'BRIEN: But in recent
days...
>> Trump's back and forth...
>> O'BRIEN: President Trump's
feud with governors has become
an all-out war.
>> In a series of tweets he
exclaimed "liberate Minnesota,
Michigan, and Virginia."
>> O'BRIEN: Encouraging protests
against social distancing
restrictions...
>> Seeing these protests at
state capitols...
>> O'BRIEN: ...even in
Washington State.
>> ...protesters gather
today in Olympia
demanding that the governor
act now.
>> Sunday's protests in Olympia
is the latest in a wave of
demonstrations.
>> These are people expressing
their views, I see where they
are, and I see the way they're
working, they seem to be
very responsible people to me.
>> The governor of
Washington state says the
president may be inciting
violence.
>> O'BRIEN: In his own tweets,
Governor Inslee said Trump was
"unhinged," "off the rails," and
"fomenting domestic rebellion."
When I talked to Governor
Inslee, he told me it's no time
to be rushing to re-open.
>> All leaders have the biggest
challenge to make sure people
understand that as the sun
comes up and the daffodils come
out, we've got to double our
efforts.
Because if you relax too soon
the curve just can rebound
and start right back up
again.
The most dangerous element in my
state today is the virus of
complacency because we have to
be just as diligent for the next
several weeks as we were the
last several weeks.
>> O'BRIEN: I wanted to know
what pandemic modeler Chris
Murray thought of all of this.
He runs the Institute for Health
Metrics and Evaluation at the
University of Washington.
>> If you ask Chris Murray...
>> O'BRIEN: Its models are often
cited by President Trump's
coronavirus task force.
So, really, when you think about
it, Chris, there's no scenario
going forward that you can
envision that doesn't demand
mass testing, if not testing for
everyone?
>> The issue will be, you know,
the capacity to test.
Right, how many tests are
practically feasible come June,
state by state?
And it may not be anywhere near
enough to be able to do
full-scale mass testing.
So then if you take measures
off May 1, and there's a pretty
quick rebound, so by mid-July,
we'd be right back to where we
are now.
>> O'BRIEN: Really?
Exactly the rate of death and
hospitalization that we're
dealing with?
>> Pretty much, yeah.
So, we're not going to want to
take off measures May 1, let's
put it that way.
>> And the second wave won't be
like the first wave.
>> O'BRIEN: That the president
isn't heeding scientific
warnings, once again, is causing
alarm among those who've been
dealing with the outbreak since
the beginning.
>> I am pessimistic about the
next few months.
I think it's going to be really
hard and we need to ramp up.
Ramp up, hurry, we need a
leader at the top who's willing
to go well beyond where he is
right now in saying, "Here's
what we need to do in terms of
testing" and giving people the
information they need to get
the economy going.
Long term, I'm optimistic, but
it's a long ways between here
and there.
♪ ♪
>> O'BRIEN: I went back one last
time to where the outbreak took
hold here, Evergreen Hospital,
where those patients from the
nursing home were treated in
February.
It is an apt window into where
Seattle and the country are
right now.
I met a woman who was recovering
from COVID-19, Rosanne Eskenazi.
>> I want to give you a kiss
and stuff but I can't.
>> Nope.
>> O'BRIEN: At 63, with an
immune system disease, her
chances of living to see her
husband Maury again were not
good.
>> When they put her on the
ventilator, I never thought I'd
see her again.
And I wasn't reading about
people that were surviving this
and coming out of this, so
I was... you know, it was over.
>> I don't even know how many
weeks it was, but I don't
remember a lot.
>> When we brought her, when the
day came that... she looked
horrible.
Her temperature was horrible.
>> It was like 105?
>> O'BRIEN: Oh, my God, really?
>> It was 105 and she was like
coughing and we had the
ambulance come.
They sent two ambulances.
This was the beginning of the
COVID, you know?
>> O'BRIEN: You didn't really
fully appreciate how bad it was,
did you, because you were kind
of out of it?
>> Yeah, I was out of it.
I saw my parents, my dead
parents, when I was here.
I don't know whether...
I was saying I don't know
whether it was a dream or a
hallucination.
My parents were here and they
were sitting across from me and
they all said, you know, "You're
going to be okay.
Everything's going to be okay.
You're going to be okay and
if something happens, your
children will be fine.
Everything's going to be great.
You have all this family and
stuff, so don't worry."
So... and it really helped me
not worry.
Oh, there, it says that way.
>> Yeah, sorry.
>> O'BRIEN: Rosanne was on her
way home...
>> Bye!
>> O'BRIEN: But there were
others still coming in, needing
urgent attention.
(people chattering)
I met critical care and
pulmonary physician Michael
Bundesmann, who was focused on
one particular patient.
>> This is a person who has
multi-organ failure and
ultimately required mechanical
ventilation and now needs
dialysis, kidney replacement
therapy, they're in shock.
>> O'BRIEN: Three days earlier,
he'd been awake, alert,
joking with his doctors.
>> Patients come in and they
look okay on one day, and some
of them are kind of okay to be
discharged from the emergency
room, and come back a few days
later much more sick.
That degree of unpredictability
I think is very unsettling for
everybody.
>> O'BRIEN: Dr. Bundesmann says
the pace has slackened some
since the darkest days.
>> We could feel the curve
flatten a few days ago, probably
even last week.
It has allowed us to be able to
see patients and to take care of
them at a pace that's a little
more used to what our ICU can
handle, volume-wise.
And it's certainly made a big
difference.
>> We are now I think at a stage
where I think we can keep this
pace that we have going and
that's a good thing because how
many people are still
susceptible to this infection.
It's going to be a long haul, I
think.
Some of the things that worry us
are, you know, what happens when
there's a next large outbreak in
a skilled nursing facility, the
next time a susceptible
population gets hit within a
tight community.
I don't know when that's going
to happen, I think that until
there is some degree of herd
immunity, there are going
to be people out there who have
to be planning this out very
carefully and cautiously, when
people can start returning to
work, who can start returning to
work, and what time frame.
Because as that happens,
the cases are going to start to
pick up again, and we have to be
there and be able to support
them as best as possible without
stretching the capacity of our
health care system.
Tough decisions for those people
who have to make them.
>> O'BRIEN: There have now been
more than three quarters of
a million confirmed
COVID cases in the U.S., more
than 40,000 deaths.
What began as a public health
crisis here with patient one has
become a national crisis over
response, over science and
politics and decisions with
devastating consequences.
(siren wailing)
It's still a tale of two
Washingtons, the story that I
found when I arrived.
But it's also a tale of
Washington and the states, and
how the country will emerge
from the crisis.
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH
access.wgbh.org
>> For more on this and other
"Frontline" programs, visit our
website at pbs.org/frontline.
♪ ♪
FRONTLINE's,
"Coronavirus Pandemic" is
available on Amazon
Prime Video.
♪ ♪